[THEME MUSIC]
>>LISA GARR: Hi.
I'm Lisa Garr, host
of Gaia Inspirations.
And our topic for this series,
taped at the Celebrate Your
Life Conference here
in Phoenix, Arizona,
is to explore the
"I am" meaning.
And so far, the
meaning of "I am"
is very individual
for each person.
And joining me
today is someone who
understands how our individual
minds work, Joan Borysenko.
She is a world-renowned expert
in the mind-body connection.
She's a licensed
psychologist with a doctorate
in cell biology from
Harvard Medical School.
And she bridges cutting-edge
science with deep humanity.
So great to have you here.
Thank you so much
for being with me.
>>JOAN BORYSENKO: You're
so very welcome, Lisa.
I'm excited.
>>LISA: So I was telling
you this "I am" meaning
has taken on a life of its own.
It walks into the room
and takes a presence.
And I don't know how
much experience you
have with the "I am" meaning.
But what is true
for you right now?
What "I am" statement
could you say?
>>BORYSENKO: Well, I could say
I am part of the larger "I am,"
that my whole being lives in
that unified field for which we
have so many names.
But it was what we call
God who said to Moses,
"I am that I am."
And specifically, I think,
it's a great statement
because we can't personify it.
"I am that I am" is remarkable.
>>LISA: It gets us
into present time.
I noticed as you were talking,
it just sinks the moment right
into present time.
I feel really
present with you when
you were talking about that.
>>BORYSENKO: Yes.
And I think what's great about
the sense of "I am that I am"
is for me, it also means
I'm not what I'm not.
I don't have to worry about
who I think I should be,
that who I am is just right
at this point in time.
>>LISA: And I was talking
about the mind-body connection.
And what we just did is we
just synchronized our minds,
our body with this present
moment in the "I am."
And you've explored the
mind-body connection
for so long, which
I absolutely love.
So many years ago, we were
convinced that the mind
was separate from the body.
And you have done an
amazing job in helping us
understand that it is together.
We are one with our
minds and our bodies.
Can you talk a
little bit about what
you've discovered over the years
and what that means to you,
being connected with
your mind and your body?
>>BORYSENKO: Well, first
of all, the word "mind"
has not been well-defined.
And in recent years, there's
a whole new field called
"interpersonal neurobiology."
And I think it's been
really popularized
by this wonderful neuroscientist
and physician from UCLA.
His name is Dan Siegel.
He got a large group of
people from all disciplines
together to actually
define what the mind is.
Because we say "mind" all
the time, and nobody knows,
what on earth is the mind?
>>LISA: Right.
>>BORYSENKO: And they came
up with a really amazing
definition, that
the mind is really
what carries information and
communication across time,
and that it's both
embodied in us--
and I'll talk in
a moment about how
the mind is embodied throughout
all of our cells and organs.
But it's also embedded
in our environment.
And so for example, Lisa,
you and I are talking.
And now our mind has made
informational communication.
And what I say registers
in you, doesn't it.
If I say something scary,
you'd feel anxiety.
If I say something funny,
you would have laughter.
And you would be making,
at a molecular level,
different hormones.
>>LISA: Empathy.
>>BORYSENKO: Empathy.
Exactly.
Because Dan Siegel, in
fact, founded something
called the Mindsight Institute.
And mindsight is not only
the ability to witness
what's going on in your
own body-mind system
but to actually tune in
empathetically what's
going on with another person.
And that leads to a
very beautiful form
of compassionate communication.
>>LISA: So the mind
is located, of course,
outside the brain, right?
It's located all around us.
>>BORYSENKO: It's all
around throughout the body.
And my belief is that
there's a unified field
of intelligence to which we're
all hooking in, a larger mind.
>>LISA: So extends
outside of our body--
>>BORYSENKO: Yes.
>>LISA: --into the universe.
>>BORYSENKO: Exactly.
And there's a fair
amount of experimentation
that shows that's possible.
I don't know if you
remember the physician
Larry Dossey's work talked about
the three eras of medicine.
The first era, or period
of time, of medicine
being entirely physical.
The second era really looking
at the mind-body connection.
And the third looking at
this unified quantum field
so that, while I know that
my mind affects my body,
Larry's Era III is the same
as interpersonal neurobiology
because it says your mind
affects my body and not only
as we sit here
but at a distance.
So that would mean that
distant healing and prayer
have an effect extending
beyond our body.
>>LISA: Which is
amazing because you
started talking about
this 20, 30 years ago
and did studies at
Duke University then.
And we're just starting to get
this into our culture, which
is-- it's brilliant.
And you mentioned-- so let's
talk about the mind traveling
through the body--
>>BORYSENKO: Yes.
>>LISA: --on a molecular level.
>>BORYSENKO: I think
one of the pioneers
in that was my very dear
friend, the late Candace Pert.
And she was the co-discoverer
of the receptors in our brain
for endorphins, that we
make our own endogenous--
that means "made within
us"-- endorphins.
And that's why opiates
work, because we
have an opiate system.
And she discovered, in
general, that every time we
have an emotion, it
releases what she
called "molecules of emotion."
And these little molecules
are tiny little neuropeptides.
They go through the
blood-brain barrier.
And they bind to receptor
sites on all of our cells
like a lock and key.
So you have a thought,
you have an emotion,
and literally milliseconds
later, your cells all
get the message.
When the lock and the
key come together,
you have a chemical change
in the nucleus of your cells.
And what happens is that
your genes are either--
certain genes,
activated or repressed.
And that's an amazing thing.
So your whole body changes
due to your emotions.
This is a field now
called epigenetics.
And we know your DNA does
not just regulate your life.
It itself is regulated
by environmental effects.
And the one that
we're talking about
is the environmental effect of
your own emotions on your DNA.
>>LISA: Your own thoughts can
turn on, turn off those genes.
And it's so vitally important
what our thoughts are.
And as Dr. Bruce Lipton
says, our perception
of those thoughts.
That's another level.
I mean, I so appreciate that.
So do you think
that we can turn on
and turn off things like
metabolism with our thoughts?
>>BORYSENKO: That's a
really interesting question.
>>LISA: I was
thinking about this.
I'd love to know.
>>BORYSENKO: Because
I'm a scientist,
of course I would
say we would have
to do an experiment about that.
But I do know that what you
eat, the food that you eat,
definitely changes
your genetics.
There's a tremendous
epigenetic effect of food.
So that will definitely help
to regulate your metabolism.
>>LISA: Your latest work
is about the PlantPlus Diet
Solution.
This is not a
one-size-fits-all diet.
>>BORYSENKO: No.
And it's not a vegan
solution unless you
happen to be a vegan.
But in a nutshell,
what happened was
that my beloved
husband found out
he had calcium in his arteries.
And I thought, uh-oh,
plaque in the arteries,
but I know what to do
about that, so I thought.
Because there had
been some research
that a very low-fat diet,
ultra low-fat vegan diet,
could reverse that.
So we went on an ultra
low-fat vegan diet.
And like so many
people on a diet,
we were like religious
fundamentalists.
Everybody should eat this diet.
It'll be so good for you.
You'll lose weight.
All these good
things will happen.
It's good for the planet.
It's-- you know.
And a year later, his blood
lipids had gone south.
They were much worse
than they were before.
And we both gained
about 10 pounds.
So I thought, what
is wrong with this,
because that diet probably saved
the life of President Clinton.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>BORYSENKO: And it works
very well for many people.
But it did not work for us.
So I started to scratch my head.
And because I'm
trained as a scientist,
I thought, well, let me go to
the nutrition research, which
I did for three years.
And let me tell you, it's the
worst research in the world.
You cannot trust it.
Most of the studies are
what we call retrospective.
So instead of saying, OK,
Lisa, change your diet,
and for 30 years we'll watch
your diet versus someone
else's-- that's too
difficult to do, generally.
So they do things like ask
people what they've eaten
and then make correlations.
And you can say something
may be correlated,
but you can't say that one
thing causes the other.
>>LISA: Because every
body is different.
>>BORYSENKO: Not only
is every body different,
but it's like saying,
every time you see a fire,
there are firemen there,
and coming to the conclusion
that firemen cause fires.
So it's completely erroneous.
A correlation does not
imply actual causation.
And I looked at it, and I
said, I cannot believe that
the government has made
dietary recommendations.
And as I looked at studies,
I found almost no good ones.
And as I began to look
through things, I thought,
the American diet
has gone so far
toward refined foods,
particularly refined carbs.
Turns out if you
eat a lot of carbs,
whether they're refined or
whether they're whole grains
that are ground up,
which is still refined,
many people cannot deal with
that amount of carbohydrate.
And the fact is carbs
eventually turn into fat,
and that's why we got fat, and
that's why my husband's blood
fat was rising.
Because we're
genetically different.
For example, most people can
eat all the fat they want.
It does not turn
into cholesterol.
>>LISA: Right.
>>BORYSENKO: But others
can't do that because they
have multiple copies
of a gene called APOE4.
And it turns out, most
people in this country
are carb-resistant.
And this is why we have, in
part-- there are many reasons--
but in part, why there's an
obesity epidemic and why--
>>LISA: What does
carb-resistant mean?
>>BORYSENKO: Well,
that really means
that you can't eat many
carbs because they just
turn into fat.
>>LISA: They don't absorb--
>>BORYSENKO: They
don't metabolize them
in the same way as other people.
>>LISA: They don't turn
into energy in the body?
>>BORYSENKO: They
do turn into energy,
but you only need
so much energy.
And the rest will turn into fat.
But here's the problem.
If you eat too
many carbs, insulin
can't get into your
cells fast enough,
and you end up with
high blood sugar.
And that accumulates
into a product
called advanced glycation end
products-- glycation, glucose.
So it's a metabolic sludge.
And there's no way to
get it out of the body.
We have no natural mechanism to
relieve us of these molecules.
And they can eventually
lead to heart failure
and to inflammation and
to a variety of problems.
And so what we know is different
people need different diets.
Some people would do great
on a high carb vegan diet.
Other people, like me,
will grow sick on it.
>>LISA: Interesting.
There's a great video where Joan
talks about health statistics
in our world and glycation.
Take a look.
>>Sponsored by
Quantum University.
>>BORYSENKO: Hi, everybody.
I'm Joan Borysenko.
And I'm thrilled to
be here to tell you
about some of the latest
developments in the field
of integrative medicine.
Here's where the statistics
have taken us thus far.
In 1960, the United States
was 16th in life expectancy
worldwide compared to
191 other countries.
Now we're 51st in
life expectancy
behind Bosnia and Herzegovina,
barely nosing out Guam.
And so this explains why the
average child born in 2014
is expected to live a
greatly shortened life span,
less than their parents,
69 years on average.
At the other end
of the spectrum,
our elders are already
losing their mind
to an epidemic of
Alzheimer's disease.
And kids, by the
way-- one in 68 now
is somewhere on the
autism spectrum.
That, it turns out,
is expected to relate
to diet and particularly
the kind of gut bacteria
that the highly processed
carb-rich American
diet gives us.
Something is happening that's
putting our brains at risk.
And it's the same thing
that's putting the rest of us
at risk, a diet at
starves our good bacteria,
that has too many carbs
for us to process,
that's deficient
in micronutrients.
The US spends over $2.7
trillion a year on health care.
That's nearly 19% of our GDP,
more than any other country
on Earth.
And even if no other
aspect of our spending
increases in the next 20
years, the cost of health care
alone will bankrupt
us as a country.
That's a shame,
considering the problems
we have with infant
mortality, maternal mortality,
and chronic illness
of every sort.
Let's get down to some
of the science bites now.
I say, three cheers for
nutritional literacy.
It sure isn't taught
in medical school.
It's not taught in
graduate school.
And most of us do not
know which end is up.
Why is the standard
American diet killing us?
Number one-- oxidative
stress, free radicals,
which are reactive
oxygen species that
run through the body stealing
electrons and denaturing
proteins and things.
These are produced by
pesticides, herbicides.
That's important because
pesticides and herbicides
are everywhere.
And they're destroying us.
The second pillar of dietary
doom is inflammation.
You read about that everywhere.
It turns out that inflammation
is the final common pathway
in every single chronic disease,
as well as most cancers.
The third pillar of
dietary doom is glycation.
What does that mean?
And that's when that sugar
binds to proteins in the body,
and it forms a nasty
metabolic sludge
that we have no way
of getting rid of.
The fourth pillar
of dietary doom
is micronutrient insufficiency.
We don't get enough of
certain vital nutrients,
whether they're minerals like
magnesium or various vitamins.
The fifth pillar of dietary
doom is called dysbiosis.
We are a microbial ecosystem,
as we'll discuss shortly,
and if you've got
the wrong bacteria,
whether they're the ones
swimming in your eyeballs,
coating the surface
of your skin,
or residing in your digestive
tract, that can cause obesity.
It can cause mood disorders.
It can cause a variety
of different problems.
And it's the elephant in
the room of mental health
and physical health.
So let's learn more.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>LISA: We just
learned a little bit
about the glycation process.
So if somebody is eating an
enormous amount of carbs,
you're saying that the nutrients
cannot get through the carbs
to get into the cells.
>>BORYSENKO: No.
That's not quite right.
>>LISA: Let me try that again.
>>BORYSENKO: What I'm saying
is they develop too much sugar
in the bloodstream.
The point of insulin is to
take sugar out of the blood
and into the cells where
either it's for energy
or it's stored as
a chain of sugars,
which is called a starch.
And the starch that
we store in our cells
for later use is
called glycogen.
And what happens-- let's
look at a marathon runner.
You don't have that much
glycogen stored in your cell.
So at about the 20th
mile of a marathon,
a runner will run out of
energy because they've used up
all their glycogen stores.
Then they have to start
burning fat for energy, which
takes longer, and
that's why it's
so difficult to run the last
few miles of the marathon.
But if you eat too
many carbs regularly
and your body just doesn't
have the metabolic capacity
to absorb that many, you
just make too much sugar
in your blood, and that
extra sugar eventually
gets taken up by the
liver and converted
to fat, which is then sent
to your favorite fat storage
places in your body.
So you'll not only
get fat, but you'll
develop these
advanced glycation end
products, which are
called AGEs, A-G-E,
and they really do age us.
>>LISA: Age you.
Can you cleanse?
Does cleansing help with
something like that?
>>BORYSENKO: No.
>>LISA: No.
Why not?
>>BORYSENKO: There
is no mechanism
once you have built up AGEs.
And that's because
when you think back
in time, before we
had processed foods,
you couldn't eat too many carbs.
But as soon as we
started to process foods,
more and more people
found they were
eating more than their
individual metabolism could
handle.
And fortunately,
one of the things
that I write about in
"The PlantPlus Diet
Solution" is that
there are very simple
tests you can ask your
doctor for to figure out
where's your blood
sugar, how you're doing,
how insulin sensitive
or resistant you are.
And that's really
very, very important.
>>LISA: So if someone
is hypoglycemic,
that would mean that
their blood sugar drops
too low and too high?
So is there an insulin-related
issue with hypoglycemia?
>>BORYSENKO: Yes.
There's an
insulin-related issue.
And generally speaking, if
you're developing hypoglycemia,
it's because you're not
metabolizing the carbs well
enough, and you
get this bouncing.
>>LISA: So what is the solution?
What is the PlantPlus Diet?
>>BORYSENKO: Well,
the PlantPlus Solution
is this, that
generally speaking,
most people do not eat
enough plants because plants
give us not only
the micronutrients,
but they give us
fiber because-- people
say, why do we need fiber?
Can I like take Metamucil?
And the fact is that one of the
biggest scientific discoveries
of the last 10 years
had to do with the fact
that we are predominately made
of microbes, a funny odd thing.
99% of your genetic
material is microbial.
And microbes actually
make the lion's share
of your neurotransmitters.
They keep the gut from leaking.
They have a lot of
functions in the ecosystem
that we create with them.
And we have to eat a lot of
plants to feed our microbes.
Because microbes, what we
might think of as probiotics,
eat prebiotics, which are fiber.
And a lot of the problems
we have with health
have to do with we're not
feeding our microbes right.
And that leads to
problems as varied
as anxiety and depression--
>>LISA: Really.
>>BORYSENKO: --mental
problems because they're
making our neurotransmitters.
>>LISA: So they're
directly related.
So most of them are toxic
in our body, actually.
We carry these toxic
chemicals in our body
that kills the
microbes in our body?
>>BORYSENKO: Well,
absolutely antibiotics.
If you think about meat that's
been raised with antibiotics,
the antibiotics get into you.
They're killing many
of the good bacteria,
and they're allowing the
overgrowth of bad bacteria.
And that's a
significant problem.
We've taken too
many antibiotics.
And right now this is a
very hot field of research
because one of the
reasons for obesity
is having the wrong
kind of gut bacteria.
You can take two
mice and feed them
in a way that causes one mice to
have a certain type of bacteria
and another mice
not to have that--
feed them the exact
same amount of calories.
One mouse will become obese,
and the other will remain lean.
So that's another part
of our obesity epidemic.
And with the PlantPlus
Diet Solution,
I would recommend that,
with very few exceptions,
you eat a pound of vegetables
a day, which sounds like a lot.
>>LISA: Do you juice them?
Do you cook them?
How do you eat them?
>>BORYSENKO: You can eat
them any way you want.
>>LISA: So it doesn't
matter if they're juiced?
>>BORYSENKO: I mean, juicing is
lovely, but you need the fiber.
You don't want to
throw away the fiber.
>>LISA: Right.
Yes.
>>BORYSENKO: And we do make
smoothies in the morning
with lots and lots of
vegetables and greens in them
and some fruits, maybe
apples and berries,
because both my
husband and I don't
want to eat too many carbs.
Too many, as we
know, doesn't work
for our particular metabolisms.
>>LISA: Very interesting.
All right.
Let's take a look here at Joan
talking about the PlantPlus
Diet Solution.
>>BORYSENKO: Of course,
everybody's diet
is going to be
personalized for them.
My own diet has really
eliminated all grains.
And I'll tell you why.
I used to eat a
breakfast every morning
with oatmeal and fruits.
And an hour later, I
was absolutely starved,
and I would have to eat again.
And it turns out that
I, like many people,
do not do well eating
a diet high in carbs
because it makes me hungry.
So what do you
eat for breakfast?
I like to have either a big
shake full of delicious things,
full of berries, full
of full-fat yogurt.
There I get my probiotics,
the good bacteria
that help me stay thin and
that help my body stay healthy.
And I might mix up
a shake like that.
And then maybe I have a piece
of my fantastic almond bread.
You're going to love this.
It slices beautifully.
I can put it right
in the toaster.
And there's no flour in it.
There's hardly any carbs in it.
It's actually made of
ground almond flour.
It's totally delicious.
And I like to spice
it up with some
of the superfood spices like
cinnamon, spices like ginger.
There's a great deal
of research on them.
And these can actually
help you neurologically.
For example, these spices
that are used in India
are so important because
in Indian cooking,
you take the spices,
and you put them in oil.
It makes them bioavailable.
And there's much less
Alzheimer's disease
and dementia in India.
So for breakfast, if
I'm making an omelet,
I might put in various
curry spices, turmeric,
which has curcumin in it.
So you're going to find in
the PlantPlus Diet Solution
lots of superfoods.
So breakfast-- delicious almond
bread, maybe a boiled egg,
maybe an omelette
filled with vegetables,
maybe a big bowl of
berries, maybe a shake.
The food is really terrific.
For lunch, what I generally
eat is an enormous salad.
And by enormous, I mean not the
kind of squidgy little salad
that you'd find in a bowl
but a big plate just covered
with greens with lots
of fresh avocado in it.
My body does very
well with dairy.
So I like to chop up some feta
cheese there, then chop up
some kind of lean protein--
chicken or sometimes fish
or sardines.
It's very important
to have enough protein
because protein turns out
to be the skinny food.
And lean protein--
it actually takes
your body more calories to
incorporate it than the food
has.
So if you're trying
to lose weight,
vegetables and lean
protein is really
going to do the trick for you.
So that's oftentimes lunch.
Sometimes a fabulous salad.
And I've got some great salad
dressing recipes as well.
Because the whole third
part of the PlantPlus Diet
Solution is all recipes.
Then for dinner-- what
do we eat for dinner?
I think it's very
important not to have
to cook all the time because
most of us are just too busy.
But for dinner, I
often slow cook things.
So for example, whether you
are a vegan, a vegetarian,
or an omnivore, you can
load up your slow cooker
with a tremendous
amount of vegetables.
So your gut bacteria
just love onions.
So I like to cook with a lot
of onions and garlic and fennel
and carrots and celery and put
all these with maybe some plum
tomatoes in the slow cooker.
And then you add the
protein you want.
You can put in chicken.
You can put in lamb.
You can put in tempeh.
You can put in tofu.
You can make something so
delicious and spiced so
beautifully that any time
you go to the fridge,
it's ready to eat.
So in our house,
let me tell you,
the food has never,
ever been better.
And it's really simple.
I cook less than I ever have
before, in some ways, just
by concentrating
it-- two days a week.
And there's always
something fabulous to eat.
>>LISA: Is taking
a probiotic enough
in addition to the vegetables?
Or tell me about the
probiotic concept.
>>BORYSENKO: This is a big
topic of research, for sure.
Should you take probiotics?
Because the microbiologists
don't know exactly what
the best bacteria are.
We know some of them.
And clearly, what most
of them tell you is,
eat fermented foods-- yogurt
and kefir and sauerkraut
and pickles-- but not things
that have been processed
because it kills the bacteria.
But freshly fermented
things, and that's a help.
And you can certainly
take probiotics.
It's just that you
also have to be careful
because many of the
probiotics don't
have what's advertised in them.
>>LISA: The cultured foods
create their own probiotic?
>>BORYSENKO: Yes.
Because what cultures
the food is the fact
that it's living bacteria
that's fermenting the food.
And that's what they do.
So you have various
bacteria-- lactobacillus
and bacteroides and
things like that that
are in those fermented foods.
>>LISA: Well, all
of this in the diet
would make you actually
feel better and allow
your brain to feel better.
And one of my favorite
books that you wrote
is the "Inner Peace
for Busy People."
And it made a difference
for me because it
changed different concepts.
But I don't think that
I could have inner peace
without the right diet.
And that's very linked to
what you talk about in there.
>>BORYSENKO: Yes.
And that's a really
good point, Lisa.
That's why my whole work has
been the mind-body connection.
And people say,
what's the diet stuff?
Where did that come from?
Because it's been like that
elephant in the living room.
>>LISA: You can't have a
healthy mind or peacefulness
or any type of inner peace
if your body is sick.
>>BORYSENKO: Exactly.
>>LISA: That's very true,
and the inner peace-- I just
want to share this with you.
One of the things that you said
to me years and years and years
ago on my radio show is, there
is no such thing as balance.
This was when I was a
new mother and trying
to get the work-life
balance figured out.
And I said, Joan
how do I achieve
this balance, this work-life
balance and the mother thing.
You simply said, there is
no such thing as balance.
>>BORYSENKO: Yeah.
I think it's just-- it's a wrong
word because it implies that
every day, you have some of
this and a little of that
and this time and that time.
It's not so easy in our culture.
I prefer to think of balance
as almost more seasonal.
There's a time for
winter, a time for spring,
a time for summer.
Different things are happening.
But you can reduce
the seasons to a week.
You think about Sabbath.
This is a concept that's
been around for a long time.
Or the biblical thought of
letting fields lie fallow
every seventh year is a type.
And if you don't let
the field lie fallow,
the nutrients are used up,
and your crop is reduced.
And it's the same with us.
Unless we have time for being
and to lie fallow, we dry up,
and our work dries up, and we
get irritable and crotchety.
>>LISA: What I learned and have
learned from you over the years
is the fact that you can
have times of crazy busyness,
and that's OK as long as it's
followed by downtime, peace.
>>BORYSENKO: Yes.
You need that.
And your body fortunately
knows how to restore itself.
And sometimes we can't
do what we'd like to do.
It's great if you can
exercise every day.
put aside some time
for some sort of
meditation or some way
to regulate your nervous system.
Sometimes you can't.
But the good news is if
you take regular time
and unplug yourself, your
body knows how to balance.
It restores itself.
That's called homeostasis.
But it can do that even
in our crazy busy world.
Just give it a chance.
>>LISA: It can.
Even if there's
chronic stress where
it feels like there's no
solution, the looping stress?
>>BORYSENKO: That's
a different thing.
Chronic looping stress leads
to a feeling of helplessness.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>BORYSENKO: And if you're
experiencing chronic looping
stress, you really
need to deal with it
because it might be the result,
for example, of past trauma.
And your nervous
system no longer
works the way it used to.
Very, very small stresses get
magnified in an enormous way.
And that's very important
because chronic stress really
is the underlying
basis of almost all
of our chronic
illnesses because it
leads to chronic
inflammation in the body.
So that you really
have to watch out for.
>>LISA: And there's
ways to resolve it,
with meditation and moments
of mindfulness so that you can
release that--
>>BORYSENKO: Well, with trauma
you really have to go back
and--
>>LISA: Deal with it.
>>BORYSENKO: There's a
lot of new work on trauma.
But it tends to work less
from thoughts to the body
and more from the somatic,
from the bodies to the thought.
But that's a very,
very important thing
is the resolution of old trauma.
And one thing I'll
say is what we
know now is if a parent
is highly traumatized,
then that can be inherited
by their offspring
for up to four generations.
This is epigenetic inheritance.
And so that was true
of me, actually.
It was one of the
reasons why I went
into the field of
mind-body medicine.
I was just stressed out all the
time, just completely a freak.
And I could not figure out why.
It wasn't like I had had
a terrible childhood.
Nothing had happened.
And then I finally
realized, oh my,
12 relatives died in Auschwitz.
My grandparents came
here because they
were fleeing from pogroms.
And the changes
that the environment
caused in their DNA--
this is new research;
it's very exciting--
have been inherited
for several generations.
And that's why I looked
like a trauma survivor.
And I had to really clear that.
And all I've learned about
meditation, breathing,
how to shift the brain has
come in response to that.
So I also want to say if
you're a trauma survivor
or if you've got
trauma in your family,
you have to look at that as a
good thing and not a bad thing
because there's that old
statement that the wounds are
where the light
comes in, that those
are what you will learn
from the very most
in really dealing
with the challenge
of having chronic stress.
>>LISA: Interesting.
So it causes you to look to
it more and dive into it more
and realize the things that
can truly, truly help you
in your life and your
generations to come.
Amazing.
Thank you so much.
So much has been covered here,
but it all is linked together.
>>BORYSENKO: It is.
>>LISA: Absolutely.
>>BORYSENKO: Thank
you so much, Lisa.
It was really a great interview.
You do such a good job.
>>LISA: Thank you so much.
I really enjoy the healing.
And if you would like to
watch a replay of my interview
with Joan Borysenko,
you can go to gaia.com.
And until next time, I
invite you to stay inspired.
[THEME MUSIC]